  CHAPTER 9

 Back Trace Ranges
   9.1 Introduction
   9.2 Using Back Trace Ranges
   9.3 Special Notes

     197 

9.1 Introduction

Soft-ICE can collect instruction information in a back trace history
buffer as your program executes. These instructions can then be displayed
after a bug has occurred. This allows you to go back and retrace a
program's action to determine the actual flow of instructions preceding a
break point.

Instruction information is collected on accesses within a specified
address range, rather than system wide. The ranges can be from 1 byte to 1
megabyte, so if desired, complete system information can be obtained.
Using specific ranges rather than collecting all instructions is useful
for two reasons:

   1. The back trace history buffer is not cluttered by
        extraneous information that you are not interested
        in. For example, you may not be interested in
        interrupt activity and execution within MSDOS.
   2. Back trace ranges degrade system performance while
        they are active. By limiting the range to an area
        that you are interested in, you can improve system
        performance greatly.

Soft-ICE has two methods of utilizing the instructions in the back trace
history buffer:

   1. The SHOW command allows you to display
        instructions from the back trace history buffer.
        You must specify how many instructions you wish
        to go back in the buffer.
   2. The TRACE command allows you to go back and
        replay instructions from the back trace history
        buffer, This way you can see the instruction flow
        within the context of the surrounding program
        code or source code.

     198 

9.2 Using Back Trace Ranges

To use back trace ranges you must do the following:
    1. Allocate a back trace history buffer of the desired
        size by inserting the /TRA switch on the
        S-ICE.EXE line in CONFIG.SYS. For example,
        to create a back trace buffer of 100K you might
        have the following line in your CONFIG.SYS file:
        DEVICE = S-ICE.EXE 100
        A back trace history buffer of 10K is allocated by
        default. If this is suitable for your needs you do not
        have to allocate a larger buffer.
        The history buffer size is only limited by the
        amount of extended memory available.
   2. Enable back trace ranges by creating a memory range
        break point with the T or TW verb. For example:
        BPR 1000:0 2000:0 T
        The T and TW verbs do not cause break points
        instead they log instruction information that can be
        displayed later with the SHOW or TRACE
        commands.
   3. Set any other break points if desired.
   4. Exit from Soft-ICE with the X command.
   5. After a break point has occurred, or you have
        popped Soft-ICE up with the hot key, you can
        display instructions in the buffer with the SHOW
        command. For example, to go back 50 instructions
        in the buffer and display instructions type:
        SHOW 50

     199

   6. To replay a series of instructions you must first
      enter trace simulation mode with the TRACE
      command. To begin replaying the sequence of
      instructions starting back 50 in the buffer type:

      TRACE 50

   7. After you have entered trace simulation mode, you
      can trace through the sequence of instructions by
      using the XT, XP, or XG commands. This allows
      you to re-enact the program flow. For example,
      you can single step through the sequence of
      instructions in the buffer, starting at the instruction
      specified by the TRACE command, by typing:

      XT
      XT
      .
      .
      .
      XT

      The XT command single steps through the back
      trace history buffer. The XP command program
      steps through the back trace history buffer. The
      XG command goes to an address in the back trace
      history buffer.
   8. To exit from trace simulation mode type:

      TRACE OFF

   9. To reset the back trace history buffer, use the X
      command.

 9.3 Special Notes

While in trace simulation mode, most Soft-ICE commands work as normal,
including displaying the memory map, and displaying and editing data. The
exceptions are:

    1. Register information is not logged in the back trace
        history buffer, so the register values do not change
        as you trace through the buffer, except for CS and
        IP.
    2. Commands that normally exit from Soft-ICE do not
        work while in trace simulation mode. These are X,
        T, P, G, EXIT.

As you peruse instructions from the back trace history buffer with the
SHOW and TRACE commands, you may notice peculiarities in instruction
execution. These are caused by jumps in and out of the specified range.
These usually occur at jumps, calls, returns and entry points.
When you have a hang problem or other difficult bug that requires back
trace ranges, you must often use very large ranges in order to narrow the
scope of the problem. Once you have a better idea of the specific problem
area, you go to smaller ranges.

Large back trace ranges are often very slow. When using large ranges you
are usually trying to get a general idea where the problem is. Soft-ICE
has a special 'COARSE' mode for doing large ranges. This speeds up the
ranges a factor of three or more, but limits the amount of instructions in
the history buffer.

Coarse mode only collects instructions that do a memory write within the
specified range. As you are replaying instructions with trace simulation
mode after a 'coarse' range you will notice that the flow skips around
rather than sequentially executing instructions.

     201 

Coarse ranges work best for large ranges and tend to be less effective for
small ranges.

To enable a 'coarse' back trace range, use the BPR command with the TW
verb instead of the T verb. For example:

  BPR 1000:0 2000:0 TW

For further information on back trace ranges see the command descriptions
for:

  SHOW, TRACE, XT, XP, XG, XRSET, BPR


202

