  CHAPTER 10

 Using Soft-ICE with MagicCV or MagicCVW
   10.1 Introduction
   10.2 Running Soft-ICE with MagicCV or MagicCVW
   10.3 Special Considerations
   10.4 The Soft-ICE ACTION Command

     203

 10.1 Introduction

MagicCV allows you to run Microsoft's CodeView in less than 8K of
conventional memory on your 80386 machine.

MagicCVW allows you to run Microsoft's CodeView for Windows in less than
8K of conventional memory on your 80386 machine.

Using Soft-ICE in combination with MagicCV or MagicCVW allows you to have
the power of Soft-ICE while still having the convenience of using the
CodeView product that you are familiar with.

In the rest of this chapter, statements about MCV will apply to both
MagicCV and MagicCVW, and statements about CV will apply to both CodeView
and CodeView for Windows.

 10.2 Running Soft-ICE with MagicCV or MagicCVW

To use Soft-ICE 2.0 and MCV together, you must install S-ICE.EXE as a
loadable device driver. S-ICE.EXE comes on the Soft-ICE diskette. S-
ICE.EXE replaces NUMEGA.SYS in CONFIG.SYS. Use the /MCV, /EMM, and the
/EXT switches as if using MagicCV or MagicCVW alone. There are additional
switches that you may want to use for Soft-ICE. Refer to chapter 6 for
information about these switches.

To run MagicCV or MagicCVW after Soft-ICE has been loaded, refer to your
MagicCV or MagicCVW manual.

Notes:
MagicCVW requires Soft-ICE version 2.00 or greater.

MagicCV requires Soft-ICE version 1.02 or greater. The S-ICE.SYS and
NUMEGA.SYS drivers were shipped with some versions of Soft-ICE. The S-ICE
and NUMEGA

     204 

drivers must be replaced by S-ICE.EXE before you can run MagicCV and Soft-
ICE 2.0 together.

10.3 Special Considerations

Two Virtual Machines

When you are using both Soft-ICE and MCV together, you must keep in mind
that CV is in a separate virtual machine from the target environment. You
can pop Soft-ICE up from either virtual machine, i.e., when CV is running,
or when the target program is running.

If you pop Soft-ICE up while the target program is running everything
works as defined in the Soft-ICE manual. If you pop Soft-ICE up while CV
is running (typically done to break points), you must keep a few points in
mind:
    * The registers are those of CV and they CAN NOT
       be changed.
    * For convenience, the Soft-ICE MAP command
       displays the memory map of the target program
       virtual machine, not the memory map of the CV
       virtual machine. The highlighted area in the
       memory map may not be correct.
    * Any display or modification of memory occurs in
       the target program's virtual machine.
    * You have no visibility into the CV virtual machine
       except for the display of register values.
       Remember that when popping up the Soft-ICE
       window while CV is active, the register values are
       those of CV and should not be modified.
    * Instruction and program tracing is disabled from
       the Soft-ICE window when CV is active. This is to
       prevent confusion, because a trace would actually
       step through CV, not through the target program.

     205

       If you attempt to do a Soft-ICE Trace (T) or
       Program Step (P) command while CV is active,
       you will get the warning message: "Function
       not available in CV virtual machine."
       To trace through your target program code instead,
       you can do one of two options:
       * Use the CV trace command. To do this, exit
           the Soft-ICE window using the Soft-ICE X
           command, then do one or more CV traces to
           step through the target program.
       * Use Soft-ICE to go to the target program
           address, then use the Soft-ICE T or P
           commands to step through your target
           program. To do this, exit the Soft-ICE window
           with the Soft-ICE X command, then press the
           'F3' key until CV is in 'mixed mode'. This
           allows you to see both the source lines and the
           instruction addresses. Pop up Soft-ICE. If the
           Soft-ICE window is not already in narrow
           mode, use the Soft-ICE WIN command to
           change the window size. Move the Soft-ICE
           window so you can see the instruction
           addresses on the left side of the screen. Now
           you can use the Soft-ICE G command to go to
           one of the addresses. Be sure to type in the full
           address, including the segment and the offset.
           Then enter 'G' in the CV window. At this
           point, CV is not active, so you can use the
           Soft-ICE T or P commands to step through t
           target program.

 CodeView's SHELL command

If you run the DOS shell from within the CodeView virtual machine, the DOS
shell is part of the virtual machine. Because of this, you should not run
any TSRs when you are in the DOS shell. If you do, when you exit CodeView
the TSRs will disappear along with the virtual machine. This is

     206 

dangerous, because any interrupt vectors that were not restored could hang
your machine.

CV's /R switch

Soft-ICE takes advantage of many of the 80386 features including the 80386
debug registers. This means that the debug registers are not available for
CV, so you cannot use the CV /R switch when running with Soft-ICE. If you
do use the /R switch, Soft-ICE gives you a general protection error. At
this point, you can press "C" to continue, then rerun CV without the /R
switch, and use the Soft-ICE break points.

The CV /R switch works when you are running MCV without Soft-ICE.

3.4 The Soft-ICE ACTION Command

The ACTION command allows three different methods activating CV from a
Soft-ICE break point. The best choice of action is ACTION NMI. If you
experience any problems with ACTION set to NMI (usually because an adapter
card in your system is using NMI), use ACTION INT1.

     207

     PAGE 208 is BLANK

     208

