
   SECTION III - Support Features

       CHAPTER 6

 Soft-ICE Initialization Options

   6.1 Introduction
   6.2 Loading from the DOS Prompt
   6.3 Loading Soft-ICE as a Loadable Device Driver
   6.3.1 Soft-ICE Loading Switches
   6.4 The Soft-ICE Initialization File S-ICE.DAT
   6.4.1 Configuration Options
   6.4.2 Function Key Assignments
   6.4.3 Initialization Command Sequence

     165 

6.1 Introduction

The Soft-ICE program file (S-ICE.EXE) can be loaded as a loadable device
driver in CONFIG.SYS or as a program from the DOS command line. To get the
full power of Soft-ICE, it must be initially loaded as a device driver in
CONFIG.SYS. However, there may be circumstances when you might want to run
Soft-ICE from the DOS prompt or a batch file, such as:

    * You do not have extended memory in your system
        Soft-ICE can only load as a loadable device driver
        if you have extended memory.
    * You want to take up ZERO bytes of conventional
        memory. When loaded as a device driver,
        Soft-ICE occupies approximately 2K of
        conventional memory.
    * You only need to use Soft-ICE occasionally and
        there are no other programs using extended
        memory.

In some cases you may need some of the features that require Soft-ICE to
be loaded in CONFIG.SYS but do not want Soft-ICE to be resident all of the
time. In this case Soft-ICE can be loaded in CONFIG.SYS to reserve
extended memory, and then disabled, by using the /UN switch, until Soft-
ICE is required. See section 6.3.1 for more information about the /UN
switch.

 6.2 Loading Soft-ICE from the DOS Prompt

You can NOT enable all of Soft-ICE's features when loading from the DOS
prompt. If you will be using Soft-ICE as a stand-alone debugger, it is
recommended you load Soft-ICE in the CONFIG.SYS file.

     166 

To load Soft-ICE from the DOS prompt type:

         S-ICE

In systems with no extended memory present, Soft-ICE loads itself at the
highest memory location possible. The memory used by Soft-ICE is then
'mapped out', making it invisible to DOS programs. Since the total memory
visible to DOS and its programs is less after Soft-ICE loads, it is
recommended that you load Soft-ICE before any TSR's control programs.

In systems with extended memory, you should only load Soft-ICE from the
DOS prompt if you are not using extended memory for anything else (e.g.,
VDISK, CACHE, HIMEM...). When you initially load Soft-ICE from the command
line or from a batch file, Soft-ICE will prompt you with a warning
message. This warning message is just to remind you that Soft-ICE will
overwrite the highest portion of extended memory when it loads. You can
suppress this warning prompt with the EXTENDED option in the Soft-ICE
configuration file S-ICE.DAT. For more information about the EXTENDED
option, see section 6.4.1.
 
6.3 Loading Soft-ICE as a Loadable Device Driver

In order to use all of the Soft-ICE features, you must first load Soft-ICE
as a loadable device driver in your CONFIG.SYS file. The features this
makes possible are:

    * Coexisting with other software that uses extended
        memory.
        Loading as a device driver allows Soft-ICE to
        manage extended memory so you can run Soft-ICE
        with programs that use extended memory, such
        VDISK, CACHE and HIMEM.

     167

    * Symbolic and source level debugging
        Loading as a device driver allows Soft-ICE to
        allocate an extended memory buffer for symbols
        and source information.
    * Back trace ranges and the SNAP command
        Loading as a device driver allows Soft-ICE to
        allocate an extended memory buffer for a back
        trace buffer. This buffer is also used for the
        Soft-ICE SNAP command.
    * Enabling Soft-ICE's EMM 4.0 capability
    * Running Soft-ICE with MagicCV or MagicCVW

Note :
When loaded as a device driver in CONFIG.SYS, Soft-ICE allocates the
highest portion of extended memory for itself and its associated
components, so there can be no memory conflicts. S-ICE.EXE must be loaded
in CONFIG.SYS before any other driver that allocates extended memory
loaded (e.g., VDISK.SYS, RAMDRIVE.SYS). Generally Soft-ICE works best if
it is the first loadable device driver installed in CONFIG.SYS.

 6.3.1 Soft-ICE Loading Switches

One or more loading switches can follow S-ICE.EXE in CONFIG.SYS. These
switches allow you to customize the way extended memory will be reserved
by Soft-ICE. The switches all must begin with a / character. The loading
switches are:

   * /EXT XXXX -- Informs S-ICE.EXE to reserve
       XXXX Kilobytes of extended memory for other
       DOS programs that use extended memory (e.g.,
       VDISK, CACHE, HIMEM,...). If the /EXT

     168 

switch is not present, then any extended memory not used by Soft-ICE and
its associated components will be left as standard extended memory, but
the amount can not be guaranteed. The /EXT switch is useful because it is
sometimes difficult to determine exactly how much memory being used by
Soft-ICE and its associated components. Using the /EXT switch will
guarantee a specified amount is available for other programs that use
extended memory.

   * /SYM XXXX -- Informs S-ICE.EXE to reserve
     XXXX Kilobytes of extended memory for symbols
     and source usage. If XXXX is not specified, then
     all remaining extended memory is used for
     symbols. Enough memory must be allocated for
     your .SYM file and all source files. For more
     information about using symbols and source, see
     chapter 7.
   * /TRA XXXX -- Informs S-ICE.EXE to reserve
     XXXX Kilobytes of extended memory for a back
     trace history buffer. This buffer is used for back
     trace ranges and for the SNAP command. If
     XXXX is not specified, then 10K of extended
     memory is automatically reserved for the buffer. If
     you do not want any memory reserved for a back
     trace buffer, use /TRA 0. For more information
     about using back trace ranges, see chapter 9.
   * /MCV XXX -- Informs S-ICE.EXE to reserve
     XXX Kilobytes of extended memory for MagicCV
     or MagicCVW. The minimum amount of extended
     memory you can specify is 280K and the maximum
     is 620K. If XXX is not specified, S-ICE.EXE will
     reserve the remaining memory, between 280K and
     620K. See chapter 10 for more information about
     running Soft-ICE with MagicCV or MagicCVW.
     */EMM XXXX -- Informs S-ICE.EXE to turn
     XXXX Kilobytes of extended memory into EMM

     169 

       4.0 conforming expanded memory. If XXXX is
       specified, then all remaining memory is used as
       expanded. See chapter 8 for more information
       about expanded memory support.
    * /UN -- Informs S-ICE.EXE to enter protected
       mode, reserve any needed extended memory, then
       exit protected mode and unload itself. This switch
       should be used when you are loading S-ICE.EXE
       as a loadable device driver, but you don't want
       your system to remain in protected mode. This
       switch will reserve memory for Soft-ICE, and you
       must execute S-ICE.EXE from the DOS prompt
       when you are ready to use Soft-ICE.

Soft-ICE reserves extended memory in the following order, regardless of
the order the switches are specified:

       Reserve approximately 120K for S-ICE.EXE.
       Reserve memory for the /EXT switch if present.
       Reserve memory for the /SYM switch if present.
       Reserve memory for the /TRA switch if present.
             if it is not present, default to reserve 10K for
             the back trace buffer.
       Reserve memory for the /MCV switch if present.
       Reserve memory for the /EMM switch if present.

If available memory runs out while trying to reserve memory for a switch
in the above sequence, then S-ICE.EXE does the following:

    1. The remaining extended memory is allocated to
         switch being processed when memory runs out.
    2. No memory will be reserved for the remaining
         switches.

     170

 Note: 
If the /MCV or /EMM switch is present, a additional 64K of extended memory
is reserved for a DMA holding buffer.

The switches can be placed in any order following DEVICE = S-ICE.EXE.
example is:

 DEVICE = S-ICE.EXE /TRA50 /EMM 500 /SYM 2048

If four megabytes of extended memory are available, this example will
reserve approximately 120K for Soft-ICE, 2 megabytes for symbols, 50K for
a back trace history buffer, 500K for expanded memory and leave
approximately 1.3 megabytes for other extended memory programs. Note that
Soft-ICE will load into the highest portion of extended memory, leaving
the remaining memory starting at 100000H (one megabyte mark).

 6.4 The Soft-ICE Initialization File S-ICE.DAT

Soft-ICE has several load options. These options are specified by placing
special commands in an initialization file named S-ICE.DAT.
S-ICE.DAT is an ASCII text file that Soft-ICE parses at load time. This
file can contain function key assignment an auto-start string and various
configuration options. The file can be created and edited with any DOS
text editor. When loading Soft-ICE from the command line, S-ICE.DAT must
be placed in the current directory or in a directory that is accessible
through your current PATH. When Soft-ICE is loaded as a device driver in
CONFIG.SYS, S-ICE.DAT must be in the same directory where S-ICE.EXE is
located.
     
     171 

There are three categories of commands that can be included in the S-
ICE.DAT initialization file:

     * Special configuration options
     * Function key assignments
     * Initialization command sequence

6.4.1 Special Configuration Options

Any of the following configuration options that are needed should each be
placed on a separate line in the S-ICE.DAT file.
   * COMPAQ -- Compaq 386 and 386SX computer
       and some Compaq compatible computers
       (including computers containing Micronix
       motherboards) have 384K of non-contiguous
       extended memory. The COMPAQ option is
       necessary if you want Soft-ICE to use this memory.
       Note that the COMPAQ option is the same as the
       /C command line parameter in Soft-ICE 1.X.
   * NOLEDS -- The NOLEDS option tells Soft-ICE
       not to set and clear the keyboard LEDs while the
       Soft-ICE window is up. On some keyboards the
       are timing problems that will cause Soft-ICE to
       lose synchronization with the keyboard. If
       Soft-ICE hangs when you are in the Soft-ICE
       window use this option. Note that the NOLEDS
       option is the same as the /L command line
       parameter in Soft-ICE 1.X.
  * NOTVGA -- The NOTVGA option allows
       Soft-ICE to run on BIOS compatible VGA cards.
       Many VGA cards are not compatible with IBM
       VGA at the hardware level. These cards support
       VGA at the BIOS level only. Use this switch if you
       have one of those video adapters. Note that the

     172 

       NOTVGA option is the same as the /V command
       line parameter in Soft-ICE 1.X.
   * EXTENDED -- The EXTENDED option causes
       Soft-ICE to load directly into extended memory
       without prompting the user with a warning
       message. It should be used if you are loading
       Soft-ICE initially from the DOS prompt and do
       want to be prompted, and you know nothing else
       using extended memory. Note that the
       EXTENDED option is the same as the /E
       command line parameter in Soft-ICE 1.X.

6.4.2 Function Key Assignments

One or more Soft-ICE commands can be assigned to any function key at load
time. See the description of the FKEY command in section 5.8 (Debugger
Customization Commands) for a description of assigning function keys from
the Soft-ICE command line.

The syntax for assigning a function key name in S-ICE.DAT is :

   function-key-name = "string"
   function-key-name -- F1, F2... F12.
   string -- The string may consist of any valid
                   Soft-ICE commands and the special
                   characters ^ and ;. A ^ is placed in
                   the string to make a command
                   invisible. A ; is placed in the string
                   denote a carriage return. The string
                   must be enclosed in double quotes.

An example function key assignment in S-ICE.DAT is:
     F12 = "D 100;"

     173 

This will assign the Soft-ICE dump command to function key 12. When F12 is
pressed Soft-ICE will dump at offset 100H in the current data segment. The
semi-colon following the 100 represents the ENTER key.

6.4.3 Initialization Command Sequence

A sequence of commands can be automatically executed when Soft-ICE loads.
This is useful for customizing Soft-ICE to meet your needs. For example,
you might set up windows and change the default hot key sequence.
The syntax for setting up an initialization command sequence in S-ICE.DAT
is:

   INIT = "assignment-string"
   assignment string -- The string consists of any valid
                     Soft-ICE commands and the special
                     characters ^ and ;. A ^ is placed in
                     the string to make a command
                     invisible. A; is placed in the string
                     denote a carriage return. The string
                     must be enclosed in double quotes.

An example initialization command sequence in S-ICE.DAT is:

   INIT = "WIN; WR; WD 1; WC 12; ALTKEY CTRL X;"

This example will put the Soft-ICE window in full screen mode, create a
register window, create a data window one line long, create a code window
12 lines long, and change the hot key sequence to CTRL X.

Sample S-ICE.DAT

A sample S-ICE.DAT initialization file is included on the distribution
diskette. This sample assigns the function keys

     174  

so they are used in a similar manner as the function keys in Microsoft's
CodeView debugger. This sample S-ICE.DAT should also be used as is for the
tutorial in chapter 3.

     175

 Page 176 is blank

     176
